[doc] Release procedure documented (#623)
lowRISC/mocha: doc/ref/release.md

# Release procedure

This document describes the release procedure for CHERI Mocha.
It enumerates all the checks that have to happen before we can make an official release and will be updated over time as the project evolves.

## Sign-off reviews

Check the sign-offs that have happened since the last release and double-check that each pull request was approved by three reviewers.

## Check out repository

Make sure to check out a clean repository:
```sh
mkdir mocha-release
cd mocha-release
git clone git@github.com:lowRISC/mocha.git
cd mocha
nix develop
```

## Software

Make sure all software builds cleanly:
```sh
cmake -B build/sw -S sw
cmake --build build/sw -j $(nproc)
```

## Bitstream

Build the bitstream locally:
```sh

> fusesoc --cores-root=. run --target=synth --setup --build lowrisc:mocha:chip_mocha_genesys2 --RomInitFile=$PWD/build/sw/device/bootrom/bootrom_scrambled.vmem

Reviewer: Should we include the alternative nix command here?

Author: Thanks, I've put the alternative in as a comment.

#./build/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0/synth-vivado/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0.runs/impl_1/runme.log:121 Infos, 45 Warnings, 0 Critical Warnings and 0 Errors encountered.
#./build/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0/synth-vivado/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0.runs/impl_1/runme.log:13 Infos, 196 Warnings, 0 Critical Warnings and 0 Errors encountered.
#./build/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0/synth-vivado/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0.runs/synth_1/runme.log:Synthesis finished with 0 errors, 0 critical warnings and 78187 warnings.
#./build/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0/synth-vivado/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0.runs/synth_1/runme.log:1189 Infos, 528 Warnings, 0 Critical Warnings and 0 Errors encountered.
```

Program the FPGA:
```sh
openFPGALoader -b genesys2 release.bit
```
Check that the default behavior is that the LEDs are flashing.

Run the FPGA tests and make sure they all pass (assuming you have the I2C temperature sensor and SD card plugged in):
```sh
ctest --test-dir build/sw -R fpga -LE slow --output-on-failure
```

Run CHERI Linux:
```sh
# Connect to UART

> screen $(ls /dev/serial/by-id/usb-FTDI_FT232R_USB_UART_*-port0) 1000000

Reviewer 2: picocom is better?

Author: I've adjusted it to use picocom instead.

# In another terminal program OpenSBI, U-Boot, the Linux kernel and a root filesystem with the following command
util/fpga_runner.py run -e build/sw/opensbi_with_uboot/fw_payload.elf -f build/sw/linux/Image 0x90000000 -f build/sw/rootfs_uboot_image 0xa0000000
```

Once boot is successfully, check that the output is correct:
```
~ # uname -a
Linux Mocha 6.18.0-g61d1a5ed5594 #1 Sun Jun 21 20:25:04 BST 2026 riscv64 riscv64 riscv64 GNU/Linux
```

## Simulation

Make sure the simulation builds:
```sh

> fusesoc --cores-root=. run --target=sim --tool=verilator --setup --build lowrisc:mocha:top_chip_verilator --verilator_options="-j 8 --threads 2 --trace-threads 2" --make_options="-j 8"

Reviewer: In my testing the `-j 8` in the verilator options seems to be redundant.

```suggestion
fusesoc --cores-root=. run --target=sim --tool=verilator --setup --build lowrisc:mocha:top_chip_verilator --verilator_options="--threads 2 --trace-threads 2" --make_options="-j 8"
```

Author: Thanks, I've removed it.

Make sure there are no unexpected errors on the latest nightly dashboard.
Run the top-level smoketests to confirm:
```sh
dvsim hw/top_chip/dv/top_chip_sim_cfg.hjson -i smoke -t xcelium
```

## Create a tag

```sh
git tag vX.Y.Z
git push upstream vX.Y.Z
```

## Release notes

You can use the following template as a starting point:

> The COSMIC team is pleased to announce this release of the Mocha repository.
>
> The release contains a bitstream which you can flash on the Genesys 2 board `lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0.bit`, a utilisation report `chip_mocha_genesys2_utilization_placed.rpt`, a set of USB rules for FPGA programming `99-openfpgaloader.rules`, a built Verilator simulator `Vtop_chip_verilator`, a build of example software `examples.tar.gz`, and CHERI Linux artefacts (`fw_payload.elf`, `Image` and `rootfs_uboot_image`).
>
> ## Quick start
>
> Firstly download all the artefacts, then follow these steps to test on FPGA:
>
> 1. Install dependencies:
>     - OpenFPGALoader, for example: `apt install openfpgaloader`
>     - Screen, for example: `apt install screen`
> 1. Connect your Genesys 2 board with the POWER, UART and JTAG. Make sure to turn on the board using SW8.

> > 1. Configure udev rules:

Reviewer: Are all the items supposed to be numbered 1?

Author: Markdown will automatically number these correctly. The main reason to leave them as 1. in the source code is to avoid code churn when a new item is inserted in the middle of a numbered list.

# Release procedure

This document describes the release procedure for CHERI Mocha.

> It enumerates all the checks that have to happen before we can make an official release and will be updated over time as the project evolves.

Reviewer: Nit: improve wording

```suggestion
It enumerates all the checks to be done before an official release is made and will be updated over time as the project evolves.
```

Author: Thanks, I've taken your changes and written it in active voice.

# Release procedure

This document describes the release procedure for CHERI Mocha.
It enumerates all the checks we do before we make an official release.
The procedure will be updated over time as the project evolves.

## Sign-off reviews

Check the sign-offs that have happened since the last release and double-check that each pull request was approved by three reviewers.

## Check out repository

Make sure to check out a clean repository:
```sh
mkdir mocha-release
cd mocha-release
git clone git@github.com:lowRISC/mocha.git
cd mocha
nix develop
```

## Software

Make sure all software builds cleanly:
```sh
cmake -B build/sw -S sw
cmake --build build/sw -j $(nproc)
```

## Bitstream

Build the bitstream locally:
```sh
fusesoc --cores-root=. run --target=synth --setup --build lowrisc:mocha:chip_mocha_genesys2 --RomInitFile=$PWD/build/sw/device/bootrom/bootrom_scrambled.vmem

> # Nix alternative: `nix run .#bitstream-build`

Reviewer 3: I think the nix commands should be the main instructions and the underlying commands be the alternatives, particularly as for a release we expect to be in the nix shell already.

Author: I'm going to leave it as is because the bitstream build Nix command will already be tested in the release.yml.

cp build/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0/synth-vivado/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0.bit release.bit
```

Double check that there are no errors or critical warnings for example by checking the output of:
```sh
find -name "runme.log" | xargs grep "ERROR"
# Expected output:
#./build/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0/synth-vivado/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0.runs/impl_1/runme.log:WARNING: [Place 30-575] Sub-optimal placement for a clock-capable IO pin and MMCM pair. This is normally an ERROR but the CLOCK_DEDICATED_ROUTE constraint is set to FALSE allowing your design to continue. The use of this override is highly discouraged as it may lead to very poor timing results. It is recommended that this error condition be corrected in the design.

> #./build/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0/synth-vivado/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0.runs/impl_1/runme.log: This is normally an ERROR but the CLOCK_DEDICATED_ROUTE constraint is set to FALSE allowing your design to continue. The use of this override is highly discouraged as it may lead to very poor timing results. It is recommended that this error condition be corrected in the design.

Reviewer 3: Maybe close the `sh` block and add another codeblock with no language set so that you don't need the `#`s? (and same below)

Author: Agreed, that's much nicer.

#./build/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0/synth-vivado/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0.runs/impl_1/runme.log:91 Infos, 43 Warnings, 0 Critical Warnings and 0 Errors encountered.
#./build/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0/synth-vivado/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0.runs/impl_1/runme.log:108 Infos, 44 Warnings, 0 Critical Warnings and 0 Errors encountered.
#./build/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0/synth-vivado/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0.runs/impl_1/runme.log:121 Infos, 45 Warnings, 0 Critical Warnings and 0 Errors encountered.
#./build/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0/synth-vivado/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0.runs/impl_1/runme.log:13 Infos, 196 Warnings, 0 Critical Warnings and 0 Errors encountered.
#./build/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0/synth-vivado/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0.runs/synth_1/runme.log:Synthesis finished with 0 errors, 0 critical warnings and 78187 warnings.
#./build/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0/synth-vivado/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0.runs/synth_1/runme.log:1189 Infos, 528 Warnings, 0 Critical Warnings and 0 Errors encountered.
```

Program the FPGA:
```sh

> openFPGALoader -b genesys2 release.bit

Reviewer 3: With https://github.com/lowRISC/mocha/commit/d4065dcebd210970d833326d260ce9bed8f06a70, this could be `nix run .#bitstream-load release.bit`

Author: Thanks, I've added this as an alternative.

```
Check that the default behavior is that the LEDs are flashing.

Run the FPGA tests and make sure they all pass (assuming you have the I2C temperature sensor and SD card plugged in):
```sh
ctest --test-dir build/sw -R fpga -LE slow --output-on-failure
```

Run CHERI Linux:
```sh
# Connect to UART
picocom $(ls /dev/serial/by-id/usb-FTDI_FT232R_USB_UART_*-port0) -b 1000000 --imap lfcrlf

> # In another terminal program OpenSBI, U-Boot, the Linux kernel and a root filesystem with the following command

Reviewer 3: I mis-parsed this as "terminal program" instead of "terminal, program (verb)", maybe this would be better?
```suggestion
# In another terminal, load OpenSBI, U-Boot, the Linux kernel, and a root filesystem

Author: Good point, this should now be fixed.

> nix run .#fpga-runner -- run -e build/sw/opensbi_with_uboot/fw_payload.elf -f build/sw/linux/Image 0x90000000 -f build/sw/rootfs_uboot_image 0xa0000000

Reviewer 3: In https://github.com/lowRISC/mocha/commit/59bc2726803059d0322522df1bce055c575bb208 I changed some of these paths slightly so the names are more descriptive in the release archive, I think those should be `opensbi_with_uboot_fw_payload.elf` and `linux_image` respectively here.

Author: Good point, I forgot to update this particular spot.

```

Check that OpenSBI still boots on Verilator:
```sh
tail -f uart0.log
# In a separate terminal run the simulator
build/lowrisc_mocha_top_chip_verilator_0/sim-verilator/Vtop_chip_verilator -r build/sw/device/bootrom/bootrom_scrambled.vmem -E build/sw/opensbi_with_opensbi_test_payload/fw_payload.elf
```

You should see the OpenSBI logo appear over UART.
You should also check that the [nightly check](https://github.com/lowRISC/mocha/actions/workflows/nightly.yml) on the same commit passed.

## Verification

Make sure there are no unexpected errors on the latest nightly dashboard.
Run the top-level smoketests to confirm:
```sh
dvsim hw/top_chip/dv/top_chip_sim_cfg.hjson -i smoke -t xcelium
```

## Making a release

### Create a tag

```sh
git tag vX.Y.Z
git push origin vX.Y.Z
```

### Generate artefacts

Then create a pre-release which should trigger the [release action](https://github.com/lowRISC/mocha/actions/workflows/release.yml) to generate all the files necessary for the release.
Enter the release notes based on the template below and make sure to download all the files to test the quick start guide before making it an actual release.

### Release notes

> You can use the following template as a starting point:

Reviewer 3: Maybe this should be a separate file like `release_notes_template.md`?

Author: Good point, I've moved these to separate file now.

> The COSMIC team is pleased to announce this release of the Mocha repository.
>

> > The release contains a bitstream which you can flash on the Genesys 2 board `lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0.bit`, a utilisation report `chip_mocha_genesys2_utilization_placed.rpt`, a set of USB rules for FPGA programming `99-openfpgaloader.rules`, a built Verilator simulator `Vtop_chip_verilator`, a build of example software `examples.tar.gz`, and CHERI Linux artefacts (`fw_payload.elf`, `Image` and `rootfs_uboot_image`).

Reviewer 3: `opensbi_with_uboot_fw_payload.elf`, `linux_image`

Author: Thanks!

>
> ## Quick start
>
> Firstly download all the artefacts, then follow these steps to test on FPGA:
>
> 1. Install dependencies:
>     - OpenFPGALoader, for example: `apt install openfpgaloader`
>     - Picocom, for example: `apt install picocom`
>     - Nix, for example: `curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -L https://nixos.org/nix/install | sh -s -- --daemon` and adding support for Flake  by adding `experimental-features = nix-command flakes` to your Nix configuration (e.g. `/etc/nix/nix.conf`)
> 1. Connect your Genesys 2 board with the POWER, UART and JTAG. Make sure to turn on the board using SW8.
> 1. Configure udev rules:
>     ```sh
>     cp 99-openfpgaloader.rules /etc/udev/rules.d/99-openfpgaloader.rules
>     udevadm control --reload-rules
>     udevadm trigger
>     usermod -a -G plugdev $USER
>     ```
> 1. Program the downloaded bitstream:
>     ```sh
>     openFPGALoader -b genesys2 lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0.bit
>     ```
> 1. Look at UART output:
>     ```sh
>     picocom $(ls /dev/serial/by-id/usb-FTDI_FT232R_USB_UART_*-port0) -b 1000000 --imap lfcrlf
>     ```

> >     You should press the RESET button on the Genesys 2 board (BTN1) to see bootloader message "Boot ROM!". To exit picocom press `ctrl`-`a` then `ctrl`-`q`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
>    If you press the RESET button on the Genesys 2 board (BTN1), you should see the bootloader message "Boot ROM!".
>    To exit `picocom`, press `ctrl-a` followed by `ctrl-q`.

Author: Thanks for the reword, I think I'll remove this section to highlight Linux a bit more.

cp build/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0/synth-vivado/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0.bit release.bit
```

Double check that there are no errors or critical warnings for example by checking the output of:
```sh
find -name "runme.log" | xargs grep "ERROR"
# Expected output:
#./build/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0/synth-vivado/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0.runs/impl_1/runme.log:WARNING: [Place 30-575] Sub-optimal placement for a clock-capable IO pin and MMCM pair. This is normally an ERROR but the CLOCK_DEDICATED_ROUTE constraint is set to FALSE allowing your design to continue. The use of this override is highly discouraged as it may lead to very poor timing results. It is recommended that this error condition be corrected in the design.
#./build/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0/synth-vivado/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0.runs/impl_1/runme.log: This is normally an ERROR but the CLOCK_DEDICATED_ROUTE constraint is set to FALSE allowing your design to continue. The use of this override is highly discouraged as it may lead to very poor timing results. It is recommended that this error condition be corrected in the design.

> find -name "runme.log" | xargs grep -i "CRITICAL WARNING"

Reviewer: Better to make this case sensitive so that `0 Critical Warnings` doesn't show up.

```suggestion
find -name "runme.log" | xargs grep "CRITICAL WARNING"
```

Author: I thought it was better to leave it in so that you could at least see those lines. They also confirm the 0 errors as well.

Reviewer: Fair point. Though I'm getting slightly different log messages:
```diff
-./build/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0/synth-vivado/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0.runs/synth_1/runme.log:Synthesis finished with 0 errors, 0 critical warnings and 78187 warnings.
-./build/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0/synth-vivado/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0.runs/synth_1/runme.log:1189 Infos, 528 Warnings, 0 Critical Warnings and 0 Errors encountered.
+./build/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0/synth-vivado/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0.runs/synth_1/runme.log:Synthesis finished with 0 errors, 0 critical warnings and 78184 warnings.
+./build/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0/synth-vivado/lowrisc_mocha_chip_mocha_genesys2_0.runs/synth_1/runme.log:1191 Infos, 528 Warnings, 0 Critical Warnings and 0 Errors encountered.
```

Reviewer: [CI](https://github.com/lowRISC/mocha/actions/runs/28018616197/job/82930244045) is getting 78187 warnings and 1190 Infos. Let's keep this unchanged for now.

```sh
ctest --test-dir build/sw -R fpga -LE slow --output-on-failure
```

Run CHERI Linux:
```sh
# Connect to UART
picocom $(ls /dev/serial/by-id/usb-FTDI_FT232R_USB_UART_*-port0) -b 1000000 --imap lfcrlf
# In another terminal program OpenSBI, U-Boot, the Linux kernel and a root filesystem with the following command
nix run .#fpga-runner -- run -e build/sw/opensbi_with_uboot/fw_payload.elf -f build/sw/linux/Image 0x90000000 -f build/sw/rootfs_uboot_image 0xa0000000
```

Once boot is successful, check that the output is correct (substituting in the right values for `<...>`):
```
~ # uname -a
Linux Mocha <version>-<hash> #1 <date> <time> <year> riscv64 riscv64 riscv64 GNU/Linux
```

## Simulation

Make sure the simulation builds:
```sh
fusesoc --cores-root=. run --target=sim --tool=verilator --setup --build lowrisc:mocha:top_chip_verilator --verilator_options="--threads 2 --trace-threads 2" --make_options="-j 8"
```

Run all the tests and make sure they all pass:
```sh
ctest --test-dir build/sw -R sim_verilator --output-on-failure
```

Check that OpenSBI still boots on Verilator:
```sh
tail -f uart0.log
# In a separate terminal run the simulator

> build/lowrisc_mocha_top_chip_verilator_0/sim-verilator/Vtop_chip_verilator -r build/sw/device/bootrom/bootrom_scrambled.vmem -E build/sw/opensbi_with_opensbi_test_payload/fw_payload.elf

Reviewer: The firmware binary should be `build/sw/opensbi_with_opensbi_test_payload/opensbi_with_opensbi_test_payload_fw_payload.elf`

Author: Thanks!

>     ```
> 1. Look at UART output:
>     ```sh
>     picocom $(ls /dev/serial/by-id/usb-FTDI_FT232R_USB_UART_*-port0) -b 1000000 --imap lfcrlf
>     ```
>     You should press the RESET button on the Genesys 2 board (BTN1) to see bootloader message "Boot ROM: vXX.XX.XX", and seeing and "Excepiton!" is expected. To exit picocom press `ctrl`-`a` then `ctrl`-`q`.
>
> In simulation you can do the following:
> 1. Extract the example software:
>     ```sh
>     tar -xzvf release_software.tar.gz
>     ```
> 1. Make the simulator executable and run the hello world example by running the following command:
>     ```sh
>     chmod +x Vtop_chip_verilator
>     ./Vtop_chip_verilator -r release/bootrom_scrambled.vmem -E release/examples/hello_world
>     ```
> 1. Check the UART output:
>     ```sh
>     cat uart0.log
>     ```
>     Which should contain content including "Hello CHERI Mocha!"
>
> Programming new software over SPI is also possible using the boot ROM. Here are the steps to run the hello world example:
>
> 1. Open up a picocom terminal in parallel:
>     ```sh
>     picocom $(ls /dev/serial/by-id/usb-FTDI_FT232R_USB_UART_*-port0) -b 1000000 --imap lfcrlf
>     ```

> > 1. In another terminal program the SRAM over SPI:

Reviewer 3: Here also, I think "In another terminal, load the program over SPI:" would avoid possibly being ambiguous. Also would remove SRAM as DRAM also can be programmed over SPI.

Author: Agreed, thanks for catching this.

>     ```sh
>     nix run .#fpga-runner -- run -e release/examples/hello_world
>     ```
>     In the terminal where you opened picocom you should see the following output:
>     ```

> >     Boot ROM: v00.01.00

Reviewer: Should be `v00.02.00`, same in the MVP2 pre-release description

Author: I've made this XX.XX.XX as before, thanks for spotting.

>     Entering SPI bootstrap
>
>     Jumping to: 0x10000080
>     Hello CHERI Mocha!
>     timer 100us
>     timer 100us
>     timer 100us
>     timer 100us
>     ```
> 1. Boot Linux
>     ```sh
>     nix run .#fpga-runner -- run -e release/opensbi_with_uboot_fw_payload.elf -f release/linux_image 0x90000000 -f release/rootfs_uboot_image 0xa0000000
>     ```
>     You should see lots of output including `Welcome to CHERI Mocha!`. You can then use any command supported by busybox, such as:
>     ```
>     ~ # uname -a
>     Linux Mocha <version>-<hash> #1 <date> <time> <year> riscv64 riscv64 riscv64 GNU/Linux

> >     ```

Reviewer 3: Maybe this could go a bit higher up? Since Linux is the main software deliverable of this Milestone, this could near the top of the FPGA section, and have a bit more commentary.

Author: Agreed, that this should get more attention. I'll try to reorganise it.
